[Music]
Oh
h so I just got this message from Jio.
Your plan price has increased by 25%.
And before you ask why am I showing you
this? Well, it's important to understand
how two companies are literally
controlling 85 cr Indians. Yes, you and
me. That's the combined subscriber base
of AEL NGO.
[Music]
See, in July 2024, Jio hiked prices by
25%. Within 24 hours, AEL announced the
exact same hype. Recently, Jio quietly
removed the cheapest 1GB per day data
plan and AEL did the same hours later.
Now, in 2025, both companies are
planning another 15% hike. Classic case
of if you don't like our prices, where
will you go? Oh, to the other guy who's
charging the same. Well, this is Tech
Wiser Expplains and today we are diving
deep into India's telecom duopoly. How
Jio andel are milking every rupee from
85 cr Indians. Why does your internet
sucks despite you paying more and why
this is way worse than you actually
think? Now before we get angry at Jio
and AEL, it's important to understand
how all of this started. Like a lot of
people in the community would have had
internet access after 2019 2020. So
let's dial back to 2015. India had a lot
of telecom players. Data was way
expensive at 225 rupees per GB.
Expensive, yes, but you had 12 different
choices. Airtel, Vodafone, Idea, Tata
Dookcomo, Airell, Unior and many more.
The competition was real. The choice was
real. And then in 2016 came Jio's master
stroke. Jio launched with a simple
promise. Free data for everyone. Digital
India. For an entire year, Jio offered
free internet and calls for 1 year, zero
rupees for anyone. You had to be alive
in that time to actually believe that.
Indians went crazy. Like who doesn't
love free stuff? But this wasn't
charity. While Jio burned through
thousands of crores, every other company
was forced to slash their prices or just
die. Data prices crashed from 225 rupees
per GB to 18 rupees per GB. Companies
with deep pockets like Airel survived by
bleeding money. Others just couldn't.
And then came the dark era of 2019.
First Dooko exited India. Next air cell
filed for bankruptcy. Telenor a company
from Norway left India because it was
just impossible to make money in India.
All companies complained about this free
data saga and by 2022 Jio's plan was
complete from 12 plus player only three
remained Jioel and we
what of an idea merged and then they are
barely hanging. So the Indian telecom
market was successfully converted into a
duo poly and now you ask what's wrong
with that? What's the problem? Well,
before we get to the problem, here's a
solution. The sponsor for this video,
Surf SharkVPN. Now, fair thing, I'm in
China and a lot of popular apps like
WhatsApp, Google Chrome, in fact,
Instagram or Netflix doesn't work over
here. So, you just have to go to Surf
Shark VPN and connect to the nearest
country and boom, I can use WhatsApp.
And trust me, if you go outside where
these apps don't work, a VPN is a
lifesaver. And you should get Surf
SharkVPN importantly for two reasons.
Number one, SS SharkVPN works seamlessly
on all websites. So you can even unlock
content from other part of the world
like I wanted to watch Prime video here
in China which is available in India. So
I can connect to the Indian VPN and
watch Punchath on Prime like nothing
happened. Number two, these days even
for generating one image to converting a
doc to PDF that websites ask you to
login. So there's this new option called
alternate ID. So next time a website ask
for signup you can generate a temporary
mail or mobile number to sign up for
without giving your original mail ID or
phone number. Surf SharkVPN is available
at a neverse seen before cost and you
get unlimited device access. You can go
to surfshark.com/techweiser
or click on the first link in the
description and use coupon code techiser
to get 4 months extra offer. Also,
there's a 30-day money back guarantee.
So, there's no harm in trying. Now, back
to the video. So, the Indian telecom
market had these two dominant players
creating Duopoly. And now you wonder
what's wrong with that. These two
companies have earned it. Definitely
agreed. And not all duopolies are bad.
But here's four major problem with this
current Indian telecom dual early. The
first the price manipulation game. See
in July 204 Jio's basic plan jumped from
209 rupees to 249 rupees. At a similar
plan went from 299 to 349 rupees roughly
20% hike. Annual plans saw the biggest
hike 600 rupees increase. And I'm
calling this price manipulation because
when one company does it the other
company does it the same day. Now here's
the problem. Imagine if both companies
just agree that the minimum recharge
plan would be to a 1,000 rupee level.
They can do it and people will have no
choice. They'll have to buy it. Now, if
you just think from Air Tel and Gio's
perspective and say, "See, India has the
cheapest data plan. Tariff rates have to
go up. Telecom companies are not
profitable." That's what they say. Even
they say, "We want users to pay more
because there are losses." Well, here's
the real truth. These are the actual
numbers. The revenue of these companies
are at an all-time high. The stock price
of these companies are at an all-time
high. In fact, the profits are at an
all-time high. So, it's not about
losses. It's about this thing, average
revenue per user. This is the magic
number both companies are obsessed with.
So, in simple words, suppose Airel sells
10,000 rupees of recharges to 100
people. The average revenue they make
per user is 100 rupees. This is ARPU.
Now, Airel openly says that they want
ARPU upwards of 300 rupees. Currently,
it's 250. For Jio the ARPU is less than
28 rupees. Now think about it. If they
want to increase 50 rupees per user in
India for an 85 crore audience that
would generate 42,500 cr additional
revenue per year just for doing nothing.
Same tasks, same spectrum, same service.
This is not a business strategy. This is
exploitation. They don't want more
customers. They want to squeeze more
money from existing customers. And if
you say increasing prices is still fine.
Well, the second strategy is where
things get really, really dirty. Lack of
choice.
See, both these companies are only
selling data plans. What if I'm someone
who has Wi-Fi at home and I just need
calling data? Like my mother, she has
Wi-Fi the entire time. All she needs is
unlimited calling. And that's what Tric
said, the telecom regulator in India.
So, what did Jio and Etle do? They
launched voice only plans that are
expensive than data plans. Like before
try order Jio had a 189 rupees with
unlimited calls plus 2GB data plan.
Later they removed it and launched a 448
rupees plan with just calls. It's like
McDonald's selling a burger for 50
rupees but if you just want the bun it
cost 80 rupees. What's the logic? How is
a voice only plan more expensive than a
data and a voice plan? After I asked
them to reassess, there were some price
reductions but nothing significant
because guess what? What are the options
with people? And wait, it gets worse.
So, we did a random test of all team DW
members. We asked them to do a speed
test in their home and record
themselves. And here's what 5G speeds
everyone got. In fact, in the office, we
put up a phone on 4G and the same phone
with the same AEL SIM on 5G. Look at the
difference in speed tests. Massive,
right? And you would be like that's
great speeds. Well, the thing is this is
5G and proper 5G is only available in 50
cities. As per the last survey, I took a
train journey from Delhi to Balia and
the majority of the time I was on 4G.
And if you look in Jio and Airel's
recharge page, they're promoting only 5G
plans. Jio doesn't even offer a 4G only
plan. And to make things worse, if you
compare the screenshots, look at the
upload speeds. And if you compare it
with 4G, it's the same. So if I have to
upload a file to Google Drive or a real
to Instagram, 5G will take the same time
as 4G. Wasn't 5G supposed to be a better
tech? And I'm not alone. Numerous Reddit
pages are filled with the same thing.
And after all this 5G plan fiasco
recently, they even removed the base 5G
plan. Now Jio does offer the 299 plan
offline. But you know how that will go.
Bottom thing is whatever recharge these
companies want you to do, you are forced
to buy that plan. This is literally
killing choices. Now all of this price
hike would have been still fine if the
service was improving.
Well, guess what? Even that has gone
down. Like, I'll give you a personal
anecdote. In our tech office, we got a
geo connection and it never worked for
us. In fact, it was down for a long
time. 2 months I guess. Finally, I had
to tweet and then they came and fixed
it. But I had to tweet with a certain
social media following to get one simple
task done. Imagine that with a normal
consumer who might not even have a
Twitter account. And if you open Twitter
or Reddit, it's full of these
complaints. And on to top of this bad
service, there's the fourth strategy,
dark patterns.
These services have numerous dark
pattern. Remember, Etel recently gave
17,000 rupees worth of perplexity pro
free. Well, these services regularly
keep on giving you free subscriptions
like Nina recently subscribed to such
free service of 99 rupees per month for
AEL extreme play. And now this service
automatically gets renewed every month.
You can see this message. Now again it's
fine it's a subscription but how do you
unsubscribe? See you see this link on
this message. Click on it and boom a
generic page. If you scroll here it's
grayed out. How do you unsubscribe? This
is a classic example of a dark pattern
like that Instagram logout button which
you can never find and you're not able
to log out of Instagram. Instead it's
unsubscribing. It involves money. Make
sure you turn off auto renewal whenever
you buy any of this free service. So
after all of that we know the problem.
What's the solution? Like it wouldn't be
a tech wiser video if you don't talk
about the solution. The solution is
actually twofold. Number one try. Try is
a regulatory body in India which is
there to ensure fair competition, fair
business. But the policies in India are
very vague. Like for example, let's take
USA. In USA providers need to advertise
correct upload and download speeds and
no provider can offer less than 100 Mbps
download or 20 Mbps upload speed. You
need to provide 24x7 support. Penalties
are there for not providing minimum
service level. We need those policies in
India like it's high time and second we
need competition. In fact, we need to
embrace the competition. BSL is a public
company. We need a public company at
least to ensure fair pricing. If your
area has good BSL 4G, get BSL 4G. You
can check out here more on this video.
And share this video on Twitter. Tag try
on Twitter for every bad experience. In
fact, I would want other creators to
make shorts or videos on this topic. We
need the government to intervene. We
need social media to make noise because
nowadays recharge or your smartphone is
not just entertainment. It's your
business, job, education, courses,
everything. Now we try making different
content than smartphones. Tech is
something that is affecting everyone's
life now and we need such content. Hit
that subscribe button. It motivates us
to make more. Tech wiser explains every
month. This is signing off. And
remember, the only thing worse than
expensive internet is expensive internet
with pathetic service. And hold on. Can
you repeat pew pew after me? Sorry, I
cannot connect to the internet. Your
connection was interrupted. Even the pew
pew doesn't work properly. Stay looking.